Hello everyone.
And by the end of this lecture you'll be able to remove the background completely from your image so
that when you export it this part that's currently in this sort of chequered state is completely transparent
and you can see what's behind it.
Hey welcome back.
And I was about to show you guys about the eraser tool and whilst I was playing about I basically destroyed
my layered house.
I know I haven't saved or anything.
So I could equally just close the file without saving and reopen it.
However there's a very quick way of doing that process.
It's called reverting the gimp file.
And we can do that via the file menu under revert and that'll take us back to the same state of how
my led House was before.
My playful antics destroyed it.
So there we go we're back to the basic House now where I'm going to show you the eraser tool so if you've
not got your house open yet go ahead and open it up.
Or perhaps one of the other projects you've been working on so we can practice with the tool.
So first of all we're going to have to make sure it's selected it is in my case.
It's this pink square type object.
And the shortcut key for it is shift and E for eraser I suppose.
And by default it's got a couple of settings that makes it a little difficult to work with in this low
resolution that we've currently got.
And I'll show you why.
Let's go ahead.
Well the house itself now notice that we've got several layers here.
I've selected the House lierre because that's the layer I want to affect.
If I just start erasing that isn't what part of it expected I'd have expected it to just go solid black
because that's what we used to at the moment with the pencil.
So when we use the pencil tool it just puts down a solid pixel of colour.
The Eraser is not quite like that by default.
It has a brush types and we can go and have a look at that now.
So if we have a look at the tool options itself if it's not got this tab open you're going to have to
open it to follow along.
And we have a brush Now you'll notice that little image in the square box is very similar.
We glance over to the right hand side of the screen to this image.
In fact it's the same set.
If we go ahead and click on that little square we see there opens up to reveal something very similar
to what we can see down there.
And this is your type of brush.
Now when it comes to brushes themselves we'll go into that in a bit more detail.
But there are three circles right next to one another that's a varying degrees of hardness.
So we've got a 25 percent and we can see it says to hardness 25.
And then it goes all the way up to two hardness 100.
Now when you've got a brush hardness of 100 it does not have soft edges like this does.
If we go ahead and use the same tool again you can see this time.
Yes it's still a bit on the feathered side where it's not completely black and I'm expecting it to go
black.
By the way because of the layer that's underneath the house layer is completely black.
But it still got this sort of gradient between black and the whites that we're raising but it's much
stronger.
So that's much more useful.
And the reason for it doing that is simply because we're not placing our brush exactly on top of each
pixel as we start to erase.
But this tool allows you to manipulate more than one pixels at any one time as we can see if I get exactly
in the middle of four pixels which is roughly there and click all of those four pixels change at the
same time.
If I just catch on an edge it changes them all differently and that that can just be frustrating when
you try and to a raise a line like this one here when you start erasing things either side of it.
Now the first thing that I'm going to do here is just get rid of this black layer.
It's not going to help me at all.
I'm going to delete it only to clear it or anything else then of course it just looks like it's just
automatically repaired itself and all that erasing has gone but it hasn't.
If I hide the background you see that we've started adding some Alpher by raising to this house layer.
Now our re-emphasize at this point the layer you have selected is the one you're actually currently
affecting.
Now I've also on variation 1 and 2 got little white dots on them that otherwise could be removed because
that was my sort of fake erasing before I learned about the eraser tool.
Let's turn one of those on and we can see that the door itself and the windows there.
If I was to go ahead and try and erase this area here where the white is you'll find.
But nothing's happening at the moment.
Why.
I've got the wrong layer selected.
It's very easy to have the wrong is selected.
Let's go back and try to start erasing all of erase the wrong bit because it's not snapping to the pixels
like the pencil tool did.
However we can make this tool and many others snap to individual pixels by enabling a hard edge that
is under the tool options.
If we look down that says hard edge no matter what size of eraser you decide to use.
If you've got hard edge selected it will actually snap to the individual parts.
Now on this chequered background it's very difficult to see as I'm going to turn the house back on and
you can see here that chequered Square which is the size of the brush is now snapping to each individual
pixel much like the pencil tool does.
If we turn hard edge off we can see it's much smoother across the surface of our image.
Now with hard edged turned on you'll notice now I've got the wrong layer selected back to the house
there you will notice that it acts very much like the pencil tool and actually does a full erase and
that doesn't matter what size the brushes are naghma up the size to six hundred.
Let's go here and make it size 4.
It's now four pixels across.
We can see is erasing much more at the time but it's also still snapping to individual areas.
Now we set the brush hardness down to 25.
You'll notice that it still does exactly the same thing.
Now the brushes changed shape ever so slightly but it still removes 100 percent.
It's not faded like it is when you go to a hard edge and remove it.
Not only does it no longer snap but it's much more gradual with the effect of that brush.
Now the eraser is a powerful tool.
Obviously it's for erasing but it can be used quite constructively as well.
If I was to go ahead and turn on the chimney layer here making sure the house is still selected for
instance I could add an effect that looks a bit more smoky.
Now of course you may have gathered but at this point that the eraser is like an alpha brush it increases
the transparency as you use it enabling us to see through onto the other layer.
In this case just the white background underneath.
If it was turned on.
Armed with that knowledge it's now time for a challenge.
And your challenge using the eraser tool is to open up one of your previous projects.
Now if you don't have one for whatever reason perhaps you're starting this course again after a few
months or weeks do use mine.
It's in the resources against this lecture.
Save a copy of that file because what we're about to do is destructive to that file.
Remove the background and then export and share with everybody.
Now you may be wondering what I mean by Remove the background.
I mean going from an image like the one on the left to one on the right.
So it's just the house itself.
In this case that is visible the rest of it is completely transparent and you can see what's behind
it.
When you export your image export it to the forum at 64 by 64 balls video now and give that a go.
Okay guys welcome back.
Let's go ahead and remove the background from our image so that it goes completely transparent.
Okay so I've gone head and reopen my layered house so I'm starting from a fresh stance and there are
a couple of ways I could go about doing this.
The first thing that I'm going to do is decide how it's going to look at the end.
I think I'm going to go with the garridge in this case.
Here we go.
Now I'm not going to get rid of that other layer but what I will do is clean it up.
So the first thing I'm going to do is just hide all of the other layers bar the ones I want to clean
up so and make sure that I've got that layer of variation too in this case actually selected.
Otherwise I'm not going to be able to clear it up.
Let's have a look.
I need the eraser to selected hard edge fine pixel size one.
Excellent So those are those two white bits gone.
You've got another layer of visible variation one now just selecting the.
Does not enable the layer.
So that's a variation one make sure it's selected it's highlighted blue.
Of course when you click away it's no longer highlighted.
I do wish you would stay highlighted but it is.
I suppose it is a little bit highlighted but I do like it when it is bright blue because I keep selecting
the wrong letter.
Okay I am going to go to the pencil tool at this point to do a bit of neatening at this point.
With the door I'm going to do the same with the garage as well.
This is really just an optional extra rather than anything else.
So there we go.
So that's all sorted there.
And then finally the House.
Now the house itself is on a white layer.
I'm going to get rid of this variation.
Three complete Blackfin.
Okay so the House has been drawn on a white less.
I'm going to have to use the eraser tool that's fine.
Hard edge is selected.
Now the tools do remember whilst we're at this point.
What we did last so because I haven't shut down the gimp yet it's remembered all of the tool settings
that were previously enabled.
Now there are numerous ways you could go about clearing this down.
I'm simply going to follow the instructions and use the eraser at all because I don't know about anything
else fancy at the moment and would say that to maybe size 5.
That's good and then it'll give me plenty of opportunity to whiz across and remove the extras.
Ah be back in a few moments.
OK so just got the last few bits here and that's done.
Okay let's add on the chimney hat.
Do I want to see through a chimney.
No.
I'm going to go back to variation too which is where the chimney is.
In fact I am going to rename this point chimney because it's not really a variation.
It's in addition to the house.
And it is a chimney.
And let's go to the pencil tool.
White is the foreground colour and my brush is huge that set it back down to one pixel and I will go
through and just colour in the rest of that.
Okay.
That's looking good.
Excellent.
Now the one thing I didn't do was the first thing on the challenge list is save a copy.
Fortunately I have not saved yet otherwise destroyed the previous version I'm going to go to file save
a copy and save it as a layered house with transparency and obviously I've done that before.
Show you guys what's going on.
And there we go.
That is my lead house with transparency.
I'm going to once it's saved.
Are we still on lad house notice so I still don't want to save.
I'm going to go ahead and open.
My layered house with transparency.
So that is now open control shift.
Jade's zoom all the way in.
He says there we go.
That's the one I've been working on led House with transparency of confirm that the top I'm going to
get rid discard changes.
Okay so I've definitely got that one open and that's the one I'm working with now.
I can go ahead and scale that up ready for sharing to 64 by 64 and I will install been at some points
I can do this automatically although with my changing around of layers you can't do that so I still
have to get it all set up any way.
I dont mind doing this step is all scaled up hopefully no that doesn't feel like it's scaled up that
scale the image.
I dont know what happened there.
I think I must have inadvertently clicked the wrong thing.
But there we go.
Thats definitely scaled up now.
We dont want that level of detail of course being kept.
But I do now want to export so export events remembered I want to pay in G with transparency that is
important and garridge.
There we go with transparency and garage and just giving you title case threw out.
In that case and you go exports or take a few moments to export and there we go.
I'm now going to go ahead and share those.
Over on the forum I hope to see yours there as well.
And I will see you guys in the next lecture.